All right, watchers and
vue's reactivity system.
Now, we're going to use this opportunity
to dive a little bit deeper.
And for the first part of this,
I'm not gonna talk about something
that's on the surface of the API.
I'm gonna talk about watchers in
a minute and how you use them.
But before we talk about watchers,
I want to talk about how vues
three uses reactivity and
dive into what that means a little bit.
Because even though it's not necessarily
super important in order for
you to use vue it's a little important
because if you're debugging or
if you're curious how something is
working, or you don't know how did this
update automatically,
I want to give a couple of examples.
So for this part,
you can kinda sit back a little bit,
I'm not gonna be teaching you something
that you immediately have to work with.
Don't worry, I'll sound the alarms when
I start talking about watchers and
that's something that you're
gonna be working with again.
But for this part, maybe just sit back and
learn a little bit about
the vues reactivity system.
So what is reactive?
We've heard reactive programming and
people talk about reactive programming
a lot lately and sometimes people think,
well reactive programming is RXJs.
And they're not wrong.
RxJs is reactive programming.
But reactive programming is a type of
programming it's a large umbrella and
RxJs is one library that
uses reactive premises.
Angular and vue use reactive premises
mobX uses reactive premises.
But before we dive into how vue does that,
let's talk about what that is.
Reactive programming is programming
with asynchronous data streams.
Now that still sounds confusing, so
let's break it down a little bit further.
A stream is a sequence of ongoing
events ordered in time that offer some
hooks with which to observe it.
If I'm giving a really basic example.
If you had a hover state that
had some transition on it,
there's the moment that
you start hovering on it.
There's the transition state
in which it's changing.
And then there's that end state and
you have hooks with which
observe this part,
the transition part, the end part.
So that's a really basic example but
obviously when we're building company
applications it gets more complex.
When we use reactive premises for
building applications,
it means it's very easy to update
state and reaction to events.
And this is awesome because most of what
we're doing with application development
is reacting to state changes.
We're mostly reacting to things
changing an application.
Andre salts has a great post
that goes into tons of depth.
As I mentioned before,
I'm gonna go over these premises, but
I'm also gonna link off to other people
who are going into different areas so
that if you want to dive further you can.
So let's look at the canonical example.
This is an excel spreadsheet if
we have in this area two, and
three and we have a sum of five.
If we have that sum unit
in that three area,
it will automatically update
if we update the first right.
We didn't have to do anything or
say anything,
in order for that to automatically
know that that needs to be updated.
This isn't actually how
JavaScript typically works.
If we have a value of two and
a value of three and
then a sum and
let's say we change that value of three.
If we write some, it's still five, right?
That's not JavaScript doesn't work that
way because of the way that the compiler
is working because it's compiling
in a different order than that.
So let's talk about how we could
potentially make that change.
So I made this animated example
that you'll also find in
the view documentation.
We start with an object.
We add a handler and proxy the object.
In this case, it's the same.
But look,
we can intercept the object with a proxy.
And here's the cool part.
If we change the first object,
the proxied object still up updates
accordingly without adjusting the handler.
With reactivity, we can respond to
changes instantly and don't worry,
I'm gonna dive that was pretty quick.
I'm gonna dive into all of those
pieces a little bit more as well.
So how does vue 3 do this?
I'm gonna break it down into little bits.
How would we make something reactive?
Well, we need to detect when there's
a change in one of the values,
we need to track the function
that changes it.
And we need to trigger the function so
that it can update the final value.
Proxies in JavaScript are a newer feature.
In vue 2, we use object
defined property which is an,
it's predates ES6, it's ES five.
Whereas proxies are something
that is newly available to us.
It's an object that in cases
another object or function and
allows you to intercept it.
So here's the most basic
new proxy target handler.
So if I have a dinner, which is of course
gonna be tacos, I can create a handler and
say get in the target and
the prop and I return target prop.
And so basically I'm saying,
return that piece to me and I say calm,
const proxy is new proxy and I pass
in the dinner object and the handler.
And if I console dot log proxy dot meal,
what I'll get is tacos.
Because I'm returning target prop.
So I've passed that in and
that's what I'm returning.
If I have that same dinner object,
and let's say this time,
I'm doing the same thing of
returning target prop, but
I wanna do something else I can
say console dot log intercepted.
And if I do the same thing,
I'll get intercepted and then tacos.
So this is really cool.
We can still have a different
view onto that same,
we talked about computer properties
different view onto that same data.
Here, we have the ability to add some
special things to that first object.
Now, we don't actually have
to return target prop.
If we wanted to, we could return
something totally different.
And I'm showing you this to say, you have
to return target prompt in order to make
that proxy work the way that you think it
is, it doesn't automatically return that.
So if I wanted to say console dot log,
we swapped out your dinner.
I think there's a little
bit that's missing here and
return burger which would be terrible.
Then we pass in dinner and handler and
we get we swapped out your dinner burger.
So it doesn't necessarily return that we
would have to be sure to return that.
This is actually called the trap.
[LAUGH] Cuz it's a trap.
I don't want someone to return my burger.
The ability to do that in
JavaScript is called a trap.
So here we got our
original object as well.
We go back to returning that and
we get tacos.
There's another argument that we can
pass here that proxies let us do.
We can say target prop and
we can also say receiver and
we can return reflect.get and this is
something that's a native JavaScript,
all the spread of the arguments.
And what it allows us to
do is the same thing.
So why would we do this?
It's because reflect
binds this properly and
you noticed how we were binding this,
this counter and methods,
we need to make sure that
we're binding this properly.
So here, if we wanted to track
the things that are changing,
we could intercept and say, okay,
I want to still return that.
But I also want to track
the properties that are changing.
I want to make sure that I have a function
that's collecting that information, and
I'm gonna call it track.
So then we're returning the same and
we get the same thing.
And this track,
you'll find is really interesting when we
start talking about watchers because we
want to track what dependencies
are changing during that process.
What is as we're changing things
around what is changing about it.
So track in vue saves any changes and
I'm giving you the names of things so
that if you wanted to dive into
the code base you could find stuff.
So if we have a get an asset,
so are getting things and
setting things remember I mentioned,
computer properties are get only not set.
So we've got target prop receiver return,
reflect,
get pass in the arguments,
return reflects set, passing arguments.
And then we're able to track all of
the properties that are changing and
then trigger a new function that
will update things accordingly.
So trigger and vue runs the changes.
And this is the last slide.
I know this is a lot of code, but really
what this is doing is making sure that if
the value is the same, don't do stuff.
[LAUGH] Basically let's save some time.
And if the things are the same and
nothing's changed,
don't change things around very much.
So we want it to detect if there's
a change in one of the values,
which in track the function
that changes it.
And trigger a function so
that it can update the final value
in order to make things reactive.
We don't have to detect when there's
a change in one of the values.
Because proxies are already doing that for
us automatically.
We can track the function that
changes it using track and
we can trigger a function that
updates the final value in trigger.
So if you wanna explore
these packages right now,
in vue 2 another big change is
that everything was in one place.
In vue 3, everything became very tree
shakable and we're code splitting and
doing a few other things.
So what that means is everything
exists in separate packages.
So even the reactivity system in and
of itself exists in a completely different
package than some pieces of the templates.
And you might see that things like
transition that we'll use in the animation
section that's in a totally different
package as well because in case you're not
using transitions,
it will get rid of it that and
then you can have a smaller build.
So if you want to explore
the reactivity package,
this is where this lives right
now in the vue next repo.
In the future if you're watching
this a year in advance,
this will probably just save you or
vue j s.
But for now, we're keeping this for
a few months, maybe a year to view next.
As I mentioned before, proxies are ES6
previously it was object defined
property and Avenue has a workshop where
he goes into all these advanced concepts
on Frontend Masters where he describes
all of that object defined property.
This is all new stuff with the proxies.